SOURCE: NHS Pregnancy Week 40
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/best-start-in-life/pregnancy/week-by-week-guide-to-pregnancy/3rd-trimester/week-40/

40 weeks pregnant guide - Best Start in Life - NHS Skip to main content Week 28 Week 29 Week 30 Week 31 Week 32 Week 33 Week 34 Week 35 Week 36 Week 37 Week 38 Week 39 Week 40 Week 41 Week 40 The wait is nearly over. Within days, you'll get to meet your baby. It's been quite a journey, but the real adventure starts when your little one is born. What's happening in my body? If this is your first baby, then you'll have an antenatal appointment this week. Your blood pressure will be checked, your bump will be measured and you'll hand over a urine sample. Your midwife or doctor will be checking for signs of pre-eclampsia , a dangerous condition that's characterised by high blood pressure and protein in the urine. You're probably getting a lot of practice contractions now, which should not be painful. These are Braxton Hicks contractions. When you start getting labour pains, you'll know all about it! Real contractions hurt when your bump goes tight, and then the pain goes away when the muscles relax. Labour is divided into 3 stages. The first stage is when you have contractions and your cervix opens up until it's 10cm across (fully dilated). The 1st stage lasts 6 to 12 hours, or less if you've had other children. The 2nd stage is where the baby is delivered – and the 3rd stage is when the placenta comes out. Find out more about the stages of labour and birth on the NHS website . When your contractions last for at least 60 seconds and come every 5 minutes, call your hospital or midwife . RSV vaccination Have you had the RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) vaccine? It's usually offered at around week 28 but can be given later if needed, right up until you go into labour. Having the vaccination can lower your baby's risk of a severe lung infection called bronchiolitis , which can make it difficult for your baby to breathe and feed. If you've not had it yet, speak to your midwife or a GP. Read more about the RSV vaccine on NHS.UK. From breathing to bananas: 8 tips for your labour These tips could help you feel in control and manage your pain: If your contractions start at night, try to sleep your way through as much as possible. The rest will help to prepare you for the birth, and your cervix will dilate while you sleep. If your contractions start in the day, then keep upright and active, as this helps the baby to move down and your cervix to open up. This could speed up your labour and reduce the need for painkilling drugs. Try different positions. Rock on a birth ball, or put your arms around your birth partner's neck and lean on them. Just keep moving. Have a warm bath or shower – it's a tried and tested method of pain relief. Focus on breathing. You can practise your breathing techniques now. Take deep breaths in through your nose and out through your mouth. Keep your jaw relaxed. Ask your birth partner for a massage and involve them in your labour. Having their support and reassurance will encourage your body to produce more endorphins, which are brilliant natural painkillers. The NHS website has more suggestions on how your partner could support you . Eat something healthy to keep up your energy levels, like a banana or low-fat yoghurt. Avoid fatty foods, as they could make you feel sick, and steer clear of sugary foods, as they'll only give you a quick hit before a slump. Do something that helps you to relax. If you feel calm, you will be able to manage your labour and pain much better than if you're stressed. Will curries and sex bring on labour? You've probably searched the internet for ways to bring on labour and found tips that range from sex to vindaloos. Tommy's has information on what might help bring on labour , from raspberry leaf tea to nipple stimulation. There are no proven ways to safely bring on labour at home. Get advice from your doctor or midwife before trying anything other than watching and waiting. 3rd trimester pregnancy symptoms (at 40 weeks) Do you feel like you've got PMT? Or do you have lower backache? These could be early signs of labour. Check out these 5 signs that your baby is on the way . Your signs of pregnancy could also include: painless contractions around your bump, known as Braxton Hicks contractions sleeping problems ( week 19 has information on feeling tired ) stretch marks ( week 17 has information on stretch marks ) swollen and bleeding gums ( week 13 has information on gum health during pregnancy ) pains on the side of your baby bump, caused by your expanding womb ("round ligament pains") piles ( week 22 has information on piles ) headaches (read about headaches in pregnancy on NHS.uk ) backache indigestion and heartburn ( week 25 has information on digestive problems ) bloating and constipation ( week 10 has information on bloating ) leg cramps ( week 20 has information on how to deal with cramp ) feeling hot dizziness swollen hands and feet urine infections vaginal infections ( week 15 has information on vaginal health ) darkened skin on your face or brown patches – this is known as chloasma or the "mask of pregnancy" greasier, spotty skin thicker and shinier hair You may also experience symptoms from earlier weeks, such as: mood swings ( week 8 has information on mood swings ) morning sickness ( week 6 has information on dealing with morning sickness ) weird pregnancy cravings ( week 5 has information on pregnancy cravings ) a heightened sense of smell sore or leaky breasts ( week 14 has information on breast pain ) – a white milky pregnancy discharge from your vagina and light spotting (seek medical advice for any bleeding) Read Tommy's guide to common pregnancy symptoms . What does my baby look like? Your baby, or foetus, is around 51.2cm long from head to heel. That's approximately the size of a pumpkin. Your baby is getting rather squashed up now, but should still be moving around in their usual pattern. Movements should not slow down or stop, and if they do, it could be an important sign that something is wrong. If you notice any changes, contact your midwife or maternity unit straight away – there will be someone there to answer calls 24 hours a day. Your baby is about the size of a pumpkin. Action stations Be on full alert in case your waters break, as this could happen at any time. Don't expect a tidal wave, as it could be just a trickle. If you think it's started, then call your midwife or doctor and ask for advice. You might have just wet yourself, but if your waters have broken, then your labour may need to be induced , as your baby will be at a greater risk of infection. This week you could also... Enjoy your maternity leave You're probably on leave now. Find out how much maternity leave and pay you're entitled to. Start doing pelvic floor exercises It's a good time to tone up your pelvic floor muscles. Gentle exercises can help to prevent leakage when you laugh, sneeze or cough. Get the muscles going by pretending that you're having a pee and then stopping midflow. Visit Tommy's for more information on pelvic floor exercises. Antenatal classes Ask your midwife or doctor about online antenatal classes – they may be able to recommend one. The charity Tommy's has lots of useful information on antenatal classes and preparing you for birth . Ask your partner if they would like to take part in the antenatal classes. Even if you've had children before, antenatal classes are still worth going to as you can meet other parents-to-be. The NCT offers online antenatal classes with small groups of people that live locally to you. Smoking, drinking and caffeine in pregnancy Do your best to stop smoking and give up alcohol , and go easy on the tea, coffee and anything else with caffeine. Ask your midwife or GP for support. Vitamins in pregnancy To keep bones and muscles healthy, we need vitamin D. From late March/early April to the end of September, most people make enough vitamin D from sunlight on their skin. However, between October and early March, you should consider taking a daily vitamin D supplement because we cannot make enough from sunlight. Some people should take a vitamin D supplement all year round, find out if this applies to you on the NHS website. You just need 10 micrograms daily (it's the same for grown-ups and kids). Check if you're entitled to free vitamins . Exercising in pregnancy It's recommended that you do 150 minutes of exercise a week while pregnant . You could start off with just 10 minutes of daily exercise – perhaps take a brisk walk outside. Listen to your body and do what feels right for you. Healthy eating There's no need to eat for 2. Now you're in the 3rd trimester, you may need an extra 200 calories a day, but that's not much. It's about the same as 2 slices of wholemeal toast with margarine. You just need to eat a healthy balanced diet, with a variety of different foods every day, including plenty of fruit and veg. Have a look at our guide to healthy eating in pregnancy . You may be able to get free milk, fruit and veg through the Healthy Start scheme . Emotional and mental wellbeing How are you today? If you're feeling anxious or low, talk to your doctor or midwife, who can point you in the right direction to get all the support that you need. You could also discuss your worries with your partner, friends and family. You may be worried about your relationship, or money, or having somewhere permanent to live. Don't keep it to yourself – it's important that you ask for help if you need it. Contraception Getting pregnant again is probably the last thing on your mind right now. However, now is a good time to start planning what type of contraception you would like to use after your baby is born. Getting pregnant again could happen sooner than you realise, and too short a gap between babies is known to cause problems. Talk to your GP or midwife to help you decide. Talk to your midwife about newborn screening You will be offered newborn screening tests for your baby soon after they are born. These screening tests are recommended by the NHS because they can make sure your baby is given appropriate treatment if needed. Your decisions about whether or not you want these screening tests will be respected, and healthcare professionals will support you. Ask your midwife or doctor for more information about newborn screening . Baby basics From the essentials of caring for your baby to understanding their sleep, find out all the baby basics you need to know about your newborn. More in week-by-week Week 41 Week 39 More in week-by-week guide to pregnancy Sign up for emails Our emails include NHS trusted advice and support, tailored to your stage of pregnancy or baby's age. Sign up for emails Is this page useful? Yes No Thank you for your feedback!