SOURCE: NHS Pregnancy Week 26
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/best-start-in-life/pregnancy/week-by-week-guide-to-pregnancy/2nd-trimester/week-26/

26 weeks pregnant guide - Best Start in Life - NHS Skip to main content Week 13 Week 14 Week 15 Week 16 Week 17 Week 18 Week 19 Week 20 Week 21 Week 22 Week 23 Week 24 Week 25 Week 26 Week 27 Week 26 As you approach the 3rd trimester, you might be feeling more tired, and a bit more clumsy and uncoordinated. That's understandable. It's hard carrying around extra weight and also your centre of gravity will have changed with your growing bump, and that affects your sense of balance. You may need to allow yourself more time to do your usual activities, like your daily walk to the bus stop. It's important to stay active but your body's changing all the time, so be patient with yourself. What's happening in my body? There is a lot of activity going on inside your bump at the moment. Read about your baby's movements during pregnancy on the NHS website . If you're worried that the movements have slowed down or stopped, contact your midwife or maternity unit straight away. You may be getting more leg cramps now, particularly during the night. Try doing foot and ankle exercises . Just pulling your toes upwards could help, or rubbing the muscle where it hurts. 'Baby brain' Are you getting a bit more forgetful? If you keep losing your keys, then you could have what some people refer to as "baby brain". This is not a medical condition, or scientifically proven, it's just something that some pregnant women report. It could be caused by tiredness and having a lot on your mind. Whooping cough vaccination Have you had the whooping cough vaccine? It's usually offered to pregnant women at around week 20 but you can have it from week 16 to week 32. Whooping cough is on the rise – but you can protect your baby from this dangerous condition by having a vaccination. If you have not had it yet, speak to your midwife or a GP. Read more about whooping cough vaccination in pregnancy on NHS.UK . 2nd trimester pregnancy symptoms (at 26 weeks) This week, your signs of pregnancy could include: tiredness and sleeping problems ( week 19 has information about feeling tired ) stretch marks (read about stretch marks on week 17's page ) swollen and bleeding gums ( week 13 has information about gum health during pregnancy ) pains on the side of your baby bump, caused by your expanding womb ("round ligament pains") piles ( read about piles on week 22's page ) headaches (read about headaches in pregnancy on NHS.uk ) backache nosebleeds indigestion and heartburn ( week 25 talks about digestive problems ) bloating and constipation (read about bloating on week 10's page ) leg cramps ( week 20 explains how to deal with cramp ) feeling hot dizziness swollen hands and feet urine infections vaginal infections ( see week 15 for vaginal health ) darkened skin on your face or brown patches – this is known as chloasma or the "mask of pregnancy" greasier, spotty skin thicker and shinier hair You may also experience symptoms from earlier weeks, such as: mood swings ( week 8's page has information on mood swings ) morning sickness (read about dealing with morning sickness on week 6's page ) weird pregnancy cravings (read about pregnancy cravings on week 5's page ) a heightened sense of smell sore or leaky breasts (read about breast pain on week 14's page ) – a white milky pregnancy discharge from your vagina and light spotting (seek medical advice for any bleeding) Read Tommy's guide to common pregnancy symptoms . What does my baby look like? Your baby, or foetus, is around 35.6cm long from head to heel. That's approximately the size of a cucumber. Around now, your baby's eyes will be opening for the first time and the next trick will be to learn how to blink. It's a myth that all babies are born with blue eyes – the colour will depend on the parents' genetics, and brown is very common. You will not know the permanent colour for a while, as they can keep on changing right into adulthood. However they will have probably settled on a colour by the time your baby is aged 3. Your baby is about the size of a cucumber Action stations Check out what benefits you're entitled to, as you may be able to claim Maternity Allowance from now on. This is usually paid out if you do not qualify for Statutory Maternity Pay. Find out what benefits you and your partner could claim . This week you could also… Think about telling your work You have maternity rights . You can ask for a risk assessment of your work place to ensure that you're working in a safe environment. You should not be lifting heavy things and you may need extra breaks and somewhere to sit. You can also attend antenatal appointments during paid work time. Start doing pelvic floor exercises It's a good time to tone up your pelvic floor muscles. Gentle exercises can help to prevent leakage when you laugh, sneeze or cough. Get the muscles going by pretending that you're having a pee and then stopping midflow. Visit Tommy's for more information on pelvic floor exercises. Antenatal classes Ask your midwife or doctor about online antenatal classes – they may be able to recommend one. The charity Tommy's has lots of useful information on antenatal classes and preparing you for birth . Ask your partner if they would like to take part in the antenatal classes. Even if you've had children before, antenatal classes are still worth going to as you can meet other parents-to-be. The NCT offers online antenatal classes with small groups of people that live locally to you. Smoking, drinking and caffeine in pregnancy Do your best to stop smoking, give up alcohol , and go easy on the tea, coffee and anything else with caffeine. Ask your midwife or GP for support. Vitamins in pregnancy To keep bones and muscles healthy, we need vitamin D. From late March/early April to the end of September, most people make enough vitamin D from sunlight on their skin. However, between October and early March, you should consider taking a daily vitamin D supplement because we cannot make enough from sunlight. Some people should take a vitamin D supplement all year round, find out if this applies to you on the NHS website. You just need 10 micrograms (it's the same for grown-ups and kids). Check if you're entitled to free vitamins . Exercising in pregnancy It's recommended that you do 150 minutes of exercise a week while pregnant . You could start off with just 10 minutes of daily exercise – perhaps take a brisk walk outside. Listen to your body and do what feels right for you. Healthy eating There's no need to eat for 2. You do not need any extra calories until the third trimester, which starts in week 28. You just need to eat a healthy balanced diet, with a variety of different foods every day, including plenty of fruit and veg. Have a look at our guide to healthy eating in pregnancy . You may be able to get free milk, fruit and veg through the Healthy Start scheme . Emotional and mental wellbeing How are you today? If you're feeling anxious or low, talk to your doctor or midwife who can point you in the right direction to get all the support that you need. You could also discuss your worries with your partner, friends and family. You may be worried about your relationship, or money, or having somewhere permanent to live. Don't keep it to yourself – it's important that you ask for help if you need it. Contraception Getting pregnant again is probably the last thing on your mind right now. However, now is a good time to start planning what type of contraception you would like to use after your baby is born. Getting pregnant again could happen sooner than you realise and too short a gap between babies is known to cause problems. Talk to your GP or midwife to help you decide. More in week-by-week Week 27 Congratulations! You've reached the final week of your 2nd trimester and are two-thirds of the way through your pregnancy. Week 28 Week 25 More in week-by-week guide to pregnancy Sign up for emails Our emails include NHS trusted advice and support, tailored to your stage of pregnancy or baby's age. Sign up for emails Is this page useful? Yes No Thank you for your feedback!