SOURCE: NHS — Foods To Avoid
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/pregnancy/keeping-well/foods-to-avoid/

﻿ Foods to avoid in pregnancy - NHS Skip to main content Foods to avoid in pregnancy Most foods and drinks are safe to have during pregnancy. But there are some things you should be careful with or avoid. Cheese, milk and other dairy What you can eat pasteurised milk, yoghurt, cream and ice cream pasteurised or unpasteurised hard cheeses, such as cheddar, gruyere and parmesan pasteurised semi-hard cheeses, such as edam pasteurised soft cheeses, such as cottage cheese, mozzarella, feta, cream cheese, paneer, ricotta, halloumi, goats' cheese without a white coating on the outside (rind) and processed cheese spreads soft or blue cheese (pasteurised or unpasteurised) that has been cooked until steaming hot What to avoid any other foods made from unpasteurised milk, such as soft ripened goats' cheese pasteurised or unpasteurised mould-ripened soft cheeses with a white coating on the outside, such as brie, camembert and chèvre (unless cooked until steaming hot) pasteurised or unpasteurised soft blue cheeses, such as danish blue, gorgonzola and roquefort (unless cooked until steaming hot) unpasteurised cows' milk, goats' milk, sheep's milk or cream Why There's a small chance that unpasteurised or soft ripened dairy products may contain Listeria bacteria. This can cause an infection called listeriosis . Listeriosis can lead to miscarriage or stillbirth , or make your newborn baby very unwell. Soft cheeses with a white coating on the outside have more moisture. This can make it easier for bacteria to grow. Cooking cheese until it's steaming hot kills bacteria, reducing the risk of listeriosis. Meat and poultry What you can eat meats such as chicken, pork and beef, as long as they're well-cooked with no trace of pink or blood; be especially careful with poultry, pork, sausages and burgers cold, pre-packed meats such as ham and corned beef What to be careful with cold cured meats, such as salami, pepperoni, chorizo and prosciutto (unless cooked thoroughly) What to avoid raw or undercooked meat liver and liver products all types of pâté, including vegetarian pâté game meats such as goose, partridge or pheasant Why There's a small risk of getting toxoplasmosis if you eat raw and undercooked meat, which can cause miscarriage . Cured meats are not cooked, so they may have parasites in them that cause toxoplasmosis. Liver and liver products have lots of vitamin A in them. This can be harmful to an unborn baby. Game meats may contain lead shot. Eggs What you can eat raw, partially cooked and fully cooked British Lion hen eggs (they have a lion stamp on them) and hen eggs produced under the Laid in Britain scheme foods made with raw hen egg, such as mousse and mayonnaise, if made with British Lion eggs or hen eggs produced under the Laid in Britain scheme well cooked eggs (white and yolk) from any hen eggs that are not British Lion eggs or produced under the Laid in Britain scheme well cooked eggs (white and yolk) of all other eggs, including duck, goose or quail What to avoid raw or partially cooked hen eggs that are not British Lion or produced under the Laid in Britain scheme raw or partially cooked duck, goose or quail eggs Why British Lion hen eggs and hen eggs produced under the Laid in Britain scheme are less likely to have salmonella in them. Salmonella is unlikely to harm your unborn baby, but you could get food poisoning . You should cook all eggs thoroughly, unless they are British Lion hen eggs or hen eggs produced under the Laid in Britain scheme. Fish What you can eat cooked fish and seafood sushi, as long as the fish has been cooked thoroughly cooked shellfish, such as mussels, lobster, crab, prawns, scallops and clams What to limit you should eat no more than 2 portions of oily fish a week, such as salmon, trout, mackerel or herring you should eat no more than 2 tuna steaks (about 140g cooked or 170g raw) or 4 medium-size cans of tuna (about 140g when drained) per week Information: Tuna does not count as an oily fish You can have 2 tuna steaks, or 4 medium-size cans of fish, as well as 2 portions of oily fish a week. What to avoid swordfish marlin shark raw shellfish cold-smoked or cured fish (for example smoked salmon or gravlax, including in sushi), unless it has been cooked until steaming hot Why You should avoid ready-to-eat cold-smoked or cured fish because it could be contaminated with listeria bacteria. These bacteria can cause an infection called listeriosis, which can lead to miscarriage or stillbirth, or make your newborn baby seriously ill. Cooking smoked or cured fish until it's steaming hot will kill any bacteria that may be present. You should limit tuna because it has more mercury in it than other fish. If you eat too much mercury, it can be harmful to your unborn baby. You should limit oily fish because they can have pollutants such as dioxins and polychlorinated biphenyls in them. If you eat too much of these, they can be harmful to your unborn baby. You should avoid raw shellfish because they can have harmful bacteria, viruses or toxins in them. These can make you unwell and give you food poisoning. Other foods and drinks Caffeine You can have caffeine, but no more than 200mg per day. Regularly drinking more than this amount can increase your risk of pregnancy complications, such as low birthweight, and even miscarriage. There is: 100mg in a mug of instant coffee 140mg in a mug of filter coffee 75mg in a mug of tea (green tea can have the same amount of caffeine as regular tea) 40mg in a can of cola 80mg in a 250ml can of energy drink less than 25mg in a 50g bar of plain dark chocolate less than 10mg in a 50g bar of plain milk chocolate Herbal teas The caffeine content can vary quite widely between different brands of herbal tea. Some contain no caffeine, while others may have quite high levels. Check the ingredients label on the packet to see how much caffeine is in a brand. Some of the herbs used in herbal tea can also be potentially dangerous if you have a lot of them during pregnancy; especially during weeks 1 to 12 (first trimester). As a general rule, if you drink no more than 1 to 2 cups of herbal tea a day during your pregnancy, you should be fine. Alcohol Drinking alcohol in pregnancy can lead to long-term harm to your baby. If you're pregnant or planning to get pregnant, the safest approach is to not drink alcohol at all. This keeps risks to your baby to a minimum. Liquorice Liquorice is safe to eat. But you should avoid liquorice root. Fruits, vegetables and salads Be careful with fruits, vegetables and salads as they can have soil on them, which can make you unwell. Make sure to thoroughly wash all fruits, vegetables and salad ingredients. Enoki mushrooms There's a chance that enoki mushrooms may contain Listeria bacteria. This can cause an infection called listeriosis . Listeriosis can lead to miscarriage or stillbirth , or make your newborn baby very unwell. Cooking enoki mushrooms thoroughly kills bacteria, reducing the risk of listeriosis. Enoki mushrooms should be stored in the fridge before use. When preparing enoki mushrooms, wash your hands regularly with soap and warm water, and clean any surfaces and utensils used. Peanuts You do not need to avoid eating peanuts when you're pregnant. Only avoid eating peanuts if you're advised to by a healthcare professional, or if you have a nut allergy. Vitamins Do not take high-dose multivitamin supplements, or any supplements with vitamin A in them. Urgent advice: Get advice from 111 straight away if: you feel unwell after eating one of the foods to avoid you have signs of listeriosis or toxoplasmosis infection You can call 111 or get help from 111 online Get Better Health's Start for Life pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for Start for Life weekly emails for expert advice, videos and tips on pregnancy, birth and beyond. More in Keeping well in pregnancy Page last reviewed: 19 May 2023 Next review due: 19 May 2026