SOURCE: NHS Pregnancy Week 6
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/best-start-in-life/pregnancy/week-by-week-guide-to-pregnancy/1st-trimester/week-6/

6 weeks pregnant guide - Best Start in Life - NHS Skip to main content Week 4 Week 5 Week 6 Week 7 Week 8 Week 9 Week 10 Week 11 Week 12 Week 6 Now the size of a baked bean, your baby is growing and changing at a fast pace. To achieve this, they get everything they need from you. For information on your pregnancy journey, sign up for regular emails tailored to your stage of pregnancy or baby's age. What's happening in my body? Your baby is growing and changing at a fast pace as they start to grow arms, legs and ears. The liver, brain and musculoskeletal system are also developing. To achieve this transformation, the baby gets everything they need from you. Feeling nausea Morning sickness can occur at any time of day, although it's usually worse when you first wake up. It might help to keep a snack by your bed. Try eating 6 small meals a day, get lots of rest, and follow a balanced, healthy diet with lots of water. Read these tips on healthy eating. Some people find that ginger helps (such as ginger tea, ginger ale, crystallised ginger and ginger biscuits). Others say sucking ice cubes and wearing travel acupressure wristbands helps. If you cannot keep food down, talk to your midwife or doctor. Early pregnancy symptoms (at 6 weeks) You may be dealing with morning sickness and tiredness, along with other early signs of pregnancy. Your symptoms could also include: a metallic taste in your mouth sore breasts mood swings (read about mood swings in week 8) headaches (read about headaches in pregnancy on NHS.uk ) new food likes and dislikes a heightened sense of smell you may need to pee more frequently a white milky pregnancy discharge from your vagina light spotting (see your doctor if you get bleeding in pregnancy) cramping, a bit like period pains darkened skin on your face or brown patches – this is known as chloasma or the "mask of pregnancy" thicker and shinier hair bloating ( read about dealing with bloating in week 10 ) Read Tommy's guide to common pregnancy symptoms. A lot of people start to feel better after the 1st trimester (after 12 weeks). Talk to your midwife or doctor about anything that's worrying you. What does my baby look like? Your baby, or embryo, is around 6mm long, which is about the size and shape of a pea. Some people think it resembles a tadpole with its little tail. The arms and legs are starting to form and are known as limb buds. There are tiny dents where the ears will be. There's a bump where the heart is and another bulge where the head will be. Sometimes the heartbeat can be picked up by a vaginal ultrasound scan, but you are unlikely to be offered one unless you've had IVF. The embryo is covered with a thin layer of transparent skin. Your baby is about the size of a pea. Action stations The advice for week 6 is the same as for the earlier weeks. Try to rest as much as possible. See your midwife or GP Share the news with your GP or ask for an appointment with a midwife at your doctors' surgery. Alternatively you can refer yourself to your local hospital – look for contact details on their website. You'll need to arrange a booking appointment . This usually takes place between weeks 8 and 12, and takes around an hour. You can talk about the options for your pregnancy and the birth. Plus you'll be offered screening tests for infectious diseases, and conditions such as Down's syndrome. You could ask about the Maternity Transformation Programme and how it could benefit you. You will get your first dating scan at 8 to 14 weeks. If it's your first pregnancy you will probably have around 10 appointments and 2 scans in total. Antenatal classes Ask your midwife or doctor about online antenatal classes – they may be able to recommend one. The charity Tommy's has lots of useful information on antenatal classes and preparing you for birth. Antenatal classes will give you the chance to meet other people and prepare you for parenthood. The NCT offers online antenatal classes with small groups of people that live locally to you. Smoking, drinking and caffeine in pregnancy Do your best to stop smoking and give up alcohol , and go easy on the tea, coffee and anything else with caffeine. Ask your midwife or GP for support. Vitamins in pregnancy Take prenatal vitamins . You're advised to take 400mcg of folic acid every day, until at least week 12. This helps to form your baby's nervous system and offers some protection from conditions such as spina bifida. To keep bones and muscles healthy, we need vitamin D. From late March/early April to the end of September, most people make enough vitamin D from sunlight on their skin. However, between October and early March, consider taking a daily vitamin D supplement because we cannot make enough from sunlight. Some people should take a vitamin D supplement all year round – find out if this applies to you on the NHS website. You just need 10 micrograms (it's the same for grown-ups and kids). Check if you're entitled to free vitamins . Exercising in pregnancy It's recommended that you do 150 minutes of exercise a week while pregnant . You could start off with just 10 minutes of daily exercise – perhaps take a brisk walk outside. Listen to your body and do what feels right for you. Healthy eating There's no need to eat for 2. You just need to eat a healthy balanced diet, with a variety of different foods every day, including plenty of fruit and veg. Have a look at our guide to healthy eating in pregnancy . You may be able to get free milk, fruit and veg through the Healthy Start scheme . Emotional and mental wellbeing How are you today? If you're feeling anxious or low, then talk to your midwife or doctor. They can point you in the right direction to get all the support that you need. You could also discuss your worries with your partner, friends and family. You may be worried about your relationship, or money, or having somewhere permanent to live. Don't keep it to yourself. It's important that you ask for help if you need it. Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Do you think you or your partner could have an STI ? If so, get checked out, as this could affect your baby's development. Talk to your midwife or GP, or visit a sexual health clinic. Long-term conditions If you have a long-term health condition, then let your specialist or GP know you're pregnant as soon as possible. Don't stop taking any regular medication without discussing it with your doctor first. More in week-by-week Week 7 Have you started to share the news yet? When you start telling friends and family is entirely up to you. Week 8 Week 5 More in week-by-week guide to pregnancy Sign up for emails Our emails include NHS trusted advice and support, tailored to your stage of pregnancy or baby's age. Sign up for emails Is this page useful? Yes No Thank you for your feedback!