SOURCE: NHS Pregnancy Week 20
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/best-start-in-life/pregnancy/week-by-week-guide-to-pregnancy/2nd-trimester/week-20/

20 weeks pregnant guide - Best Start in Life - NHS Skip to main content Week 13 Week 14 Week 15 Week 16 Week 17 Week 18 Week 19 Week 20 Week 21 Week 22 Week 23 Week 24 Week 25 Week 26 Week 27 Week 20 You're now halfway through your pregnancy! What's happening in my body? You may have your anomaly scan this week. The sonographer will be checking your baby's development and will also examine your placenta (that's the pancake-shaped organ that feeds your baby and removes waste). You might find yourself being woken up at night by sudden sharp pains in your calves. It's probably cramp, which is common in pregnancy and caused by muscular spasms. Rub the muscle hard or pull your toes up towards your ankle. Exercising more in the day could help you avoid this, and you could try these foot exercises . Maternity Certificate to claim maternity pay and benefits Ask your doctor or midwife for a Maternity Certificate, also known as a MAT B1 form. It's issued from 20 weeks onwards. You'll need it to claim maternity pay and benefits. Whooping cough vaccination Whooping cough is on the rise – but you can protect your baby from this dangerous condition by having a vaccination. The NHS recommends that all pregnant women should have the vaccination. Usually this is offered around week 20, but you can have it from week 16 to week 32. The immunity that you get will be passed on to your baby through the placenta and then offer protection until the routine 6-in-1 vaccine that most babies have at 8 weeks old. Find out more about the whooping cough vaccination on NHS.UK 2nd trimester pregnancy symptoms (at 20 weeks) Your signs of pregnancy this week could include: tiredness and sleeping problems ( week 19 has information about feeling tired ) stretch marks ( read about stretch marks on week 17's page ) swollen and bleeding gums ( week 13 has information about gum health during pregnancy ) pains on the side of your belly, caused by your expanding womb (known as "round ligament pains") headaches (read about headaches in pregnancy on NHS.uk ) nosebleeds bloating and constipation (read about bloating on week 10's page ) indigestion and heartburn ( week 25 talks about digestive problems ) sore breasts leg cramps feeling hot dizziness swollen hands and feet urine infections vaginal infections ( see week 15 for vaginal health ) darkened skin on your face or brown patches – this is known as chloasma or the "mask of pregnancy" greasier, spotty skin thicker and shinier hair You may also experience symptoms from earlier weeks, such as: morning sickness (read about dealing with morning sickness on week 6's page ) weird pregnancy cravings (read about pregnancy cravings on week 5's page ) a heightened sense of smell mood swings ( week 8's page has information on mood swings ) a white milky pregnancy discharge from your vagina and light spotting (seek medical advice for any bleeding) Read Tommy's guide to common pregnancy symptoms. What does my baby look like? Your baby, or foetus, is around 25.6cm long. That's approximately the size of a banana. Measurements are now taken from head to heel. In earlier weeks, babies are measured from the head to the bottom because the legs are curled up and hard to see. They are now covered in a white, greasy layer of "vernix". It's thought this protects their delicate skin from drying out in the amniotic fluid. This slippery layer also helps babies to make their way down the birth canal. Your baby will be getting more active each day. As well as kicking, punching and turning around, your baby could be sucking their thumb – this develops their sucking reflex, which they'll need to feed once they're born. You may start to feel a bubbling or fluttering in your belly – this could be your baby moving around. Your baby is about the size of a banana Action stations Think about telling your work You do not have to tell your employer for several more weeks, but as soon as you do, you will have maternity rights and can attend antenatal appointments during paid work time. You can also ask for a risk assessment of your work place to ensure that you're working in a safe environment. If you want to wait, the latest you can leave it is 15 weeks before the baby is due, which is around week 25. Start doing pelvic floor exercises It's a good time to tone up your pelvic floor muscles. Gentle exercises can help to prevent leakage when you laugh, sneeze or cough. Get the muscles going by pretending that you're having a pee and then stopping midflow. Visit Tommy's for more information on pelvic floor exercises. Antenatal classes Ask your midwife or doctor about online antenatal classes – they may be able to recommend one. The charity Tommy's has lots of useful information on antenatal classes and preparing you for birth . Even if you've had children before, antenatal classes are still worth going to as you can meet other parents-to-be. The NCT offers online antenatal classes with small groups of people that live locally to you. Smoking, drinking and caffeine in pregnancy Do your best to stop smoking and give up alcohol , and go easy on the tea, coffee and anything else with caffeine. Ask your midwife or GP for support. Vitamins in pregnancy To keep bones and muscles healthy, we need vitamin D. From late March/early April to the end of September, most people make enough vitamin D from sunlight on their skin. However, between October and early March, you should consider taking a daily vitamin D supplement because we cannot make enough from sunlight. Some people should take a vitamin D supplement all year round, find out if this applies to you on the NHS website. You just need 10 micrograms (it's the same for grown-ups and kids). Check if you're entitled to free vitamins . Exercising in pregnancy It's recommended that you do 150 minutes of exercise a week while pregnant . You could start off with just 10 minutes of daily exercise – perhaps take a brisk walk outside. Listen to your body and do what feels right for you. Healthy eating There's no need to eat for 2. You do not need any extra calories until the third trimester, which starts in week 28. You just need to eat a healthy balanced diet, with a variety of different foods every day, including plenty of fruit and veg. Have a look at our guide to healthy eating in pregnancy . You may be able to get free milk, fruit and veg through the Healthy Start scheme . More in week-by-week Week 21 As you start the 2nd half of your pregnancy, you'll be entering a period of rapid growth. Your baby is getting ready for life outside the womb and developing essential skills including sucking and breathing. Week 22 Week 19 More in week-by-week guide to pregnancy Sign up for emails Our emails include NHS trusted advice and support, tailored to your stage of pregnancy or baby's age. Sign up for emails Is this page useful? Yes No Thank you for your feedback!