SOURCE: NHS — Mental Health
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/pregnancy/keeping-well/mental-health/

﻿ Mental health problems and pregnancy - NHS Skip to main content Mental health in pregnancy Being pregnant is a big life event and it is natural to feel a lot of different emotions. But if you’re feeling sad and it’s starting to affect your life, there are things you can try that may help. Important: If you need help now Support is available. If you need someone to talk to now contact your maternity unit or find out where to get urgent help for mental health . Things you can try to help with your mental health Do talk about your feelings to a friend, family member, doctor or midwife try calming breathing exercises if you feel overwhelmed do physical activity if you can – it can improve your mood and help you sleep eat a healthy diet with regular meals try to attend antenatal classes to meet others who are expecting babies around the same time as you Don’t do not compare yourself to others – everyone experiences pregnancy in different ways do not be afraid to tell healthcare professionals how you are feeling – they are there to listen and support you do not use alcohol, cigarettes or drugs to try and feel better – these can make you feel worse and affect your baby's growth and wellbeing Non-urgent advice: Speak to your midwife or a doctor if: things you're trying yourself are not helping They can offer you support. They may offer you a referral to perinatal mental health services or other emotional support. Perinatal means the time you are pregnant and up to 12 months after giving birth. NHS therapy and counselling services If you're feeling sad and it's not improving, a talking therapy might help. There are different types of talking therapies for mental health problems, such as depression, anxiety and obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). Talking therapies include cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and counselling . A GP can refer you for talking treatment, or you can refer yourself directly to an NHS talking therapies service without going to a GP. If you refer yourself, it's a good idea to talk to a midwife or GP as well about how you're feeling. Find NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression Medicine for mental health problems You may be offered medicine to treat your symptoms. If you decide to take medicine while you're pregnant or breastfeeding speak to your doctor. They will help you weigh up the risks and benefits, so you can decide on the best treatment for you and your baby. They'll offer you the safest medicine at the lowest amount that will still work. Mental health problems There are many mental health problems you could experience in pregnancy. They can happen at any time, even if this is not your first pregnancy. A table explaining symptoms of mental health problems and what it might be. If you You may have feel sad all the time depression have flashbacks, nightmares or feel intense distress when reminded of a past experience post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) – this can happen if you've had a pregnancy go wrong , a traumatic birth or have experienced abuse have sudden attacks of panic or fear panic disorder have obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviours obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) have an intense fear of giving birth tokophobia – find out more about tokophobia on Tommy's website You may also find it hard to cope with your body changing shape, particularly if you have had an eating disorder . Further support You can find care for your mental health before, during and after pregnancy . Some charities and organisations offer support for mental health during pregnancy. Tommy's: mental health before, during and after pregnancy Call: 0800 014 7800 from Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm, for free Email: midwife@tommys.org Mind: postnatal depression and perinatal mental health Call: 0300 123 3393 Email: info@mind.org Maternal Mental Health Alliance: mental health support for mums and families NICE: Antenatal and postnatal mental health: clinical management and service guidance has some question ideas that might help you talk to your GP or midwife More in Mental health in pregnancy and after the birth Page last reviewed: 17 January 2024 Next review due: 17 January 2027