SOURCE: NHS Pregnancy Week 32
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/best-start-in-life/pregnancy/week-by-week-guide-to-pregnancy/3rd-trimester/week-32/

32 weeks pregnant guide - Best Start in Life - NHS Skip to main content Week 28 Week 29 Week 30 Week 31 Week 32 Week 33 Week 34 Week 35 Week 36 Week 37 Week 38 Week 39 Week 40 Week 41 Week 32 You might find your bump is making it harder to walk and making you "waddle". That's your body's way of compensating for all that extra weight up front. What's happening in my body? Over the next 4 weeks, you'll gain around 450g a week. Your baby will be putting on weight too, with around 1kg of extra fat. The extra chubbiness will help your baby to stay at the right temperature after they're born. It's very easy for little bodies to get too hot or too cold. Your baby is probably head down now, ready for birth ("cephalic presentation"). Try not to worry if this is not the case – there's still time. However, if you get to around week 36 and your baby is not head down, your doctor or midwife might offer ways to encourage your baby to turn into position. As your baby gets bigger, there will be less space in your womb. You should still feel movements, at the same rate, until you give birth. If there are any changes to the patterns, or your baby stops moving, contact your midwife or hospital as soon as possible. Whooping cough vaccination Have you had the whooping cough vaccine? You should have it before week 33, you can have it later but your baby is less likely to get the protection from you. If you have not had the vaccine speak to your midwife or a GP this week. Read more about whooping cough vaccination in pregnancy on NHS.UK . Your choice of maternity service You've probably got a good idea now about where you would like to give birth . If you're having a planned caesarean section , find out how long you can expect to be in hospital so you can get prepared and make any arrangements you need, for instance care for your other children. The average hospital stay is 3 or 4 days. Ask as many questions as you like and make sure you're confident with your choice. If you're not sure, you can change your mind. If you're worried about how coronavirus might impact your birth plan, visit the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists for the most up-to-date advice. Vitamin K Within 24 hours of giving birth, you'll be asked if you would like your baby to have vitamin K , which is recommended by the Department of Health for all babies. Vitamin K is important because it helps the blood to clot and can prevent a very rare condition called vitamin K deficiency bleeding, which can cause brain damage and even death. It is usually given as a jab in the thigh and is very safe. It's your right to refuse the jab or ask for the vitamin to be given by mouth (orally) instead. Decide what is best for your baby and discuss it with your partner. RSV vaccination Have you had the RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) vaccine? It's usually offered at around week 28 but can be given later if needed, right up until you go into labour. Having the vaccination can lower your baby's risk of a severe lung infection called bronchiolitis , which can make it difficult for your baby to breathe and feed. If you've not had it yet, speak to your midwife or a GP. Read more about the RSV vaccine on NHS.UK. 3rd trimester pregnancy symptoms (at 32 weeks) You may be feeling more tired than usual. Try and take plenty of rests throughout the day. Your signs of pregnancy could also include: sleeping problems ( week 19 has information on feeling tired ) stretch marks ( week 17 has information on stretch marks ) swollen and bleeding gums ( week 13 has information on gum health during pregnancy ) pains on the side of your baby bump, caused by your expanding womb ("round ligament pains") piles ( week 22 has information on piles ) headaches (read about headaches in pregnancy on NHS.uk ) backache indigestion and heartburn ( week 25 has information on digestive problems ) bloating and constipation ( week 10 has information on bloating ) leg cramps ( week 20 has information on how to deal with cramp ) feeling hot dizziness swollen hands and feet urine infections vaginal infections ( week 15 has information on vaginal health ) darkened skin on your face or brown patches – this is known as chloasma or the "mask of pregnancy" greasier, spotty skin thicker and shinier hair You may also experience symptoms from earlier weeks, such as: mood swings ( week 8 has information on mood swings ) pelvic pain (read about coping with pelvic pain in pregnancy on NHS.uk ) morning sickness ( week 6 has information on dealing with morning sickness ) weird pregnancy cravings ( week 5 has information on pregnancy cravings ) a heightened sense of smell sore or leaky breasts ( week 14 has information on breast pain ) – a white milky pregnancy discharge from your vagina and light spotting (seek medical advice for any bleeding) Read Tommy's guide to common pregnancy symptoms . What does my baby look like? Your baby, or foetus, is around 42.4cm long from head to heel. That's about the same length as a bunch of celery. Your baby is perfectly formed but needs to put on weight – that's what the next few weeks are all about. Your baby is about the length of a bunch of celery Action stations Have you chosen a pushchair yet? If you're buying one second-hand, check the brakes work and that it's the right height for you. You might also like to get a baby sling for the first few weeks. Babies love the close contact, and you will too. If you're thinking about buying one for your babies arrival, make sure you know how to use it safely first. You can find sling safety advice in our guide on what to buy for your newborn baby . This week you could also... Talk to your work You have maternity rights . You can ask for a risk assessment of your work place to ensure that you're working in a safe environment. You should not be lifting heavy things and you may need extra breaks, and somewhere to sit. You can also attend antenatal appointments during paid work time. Start doing pelvic floor exercises It's a good time to tone up your pelvic floor muscles. Gentle exercises can help to prevent leakage when you laugh, sneeze or cough. Get the muscles going by pretending that you're having a pee and then stopping midflow. Visit Tommy's for more information on pelvic floor exercises. Antenatal classes Ask your midwife or doctor about online antenatal classes – they may be able to recommend one. The charity Tommy's has lots of useful information on antenatal classes and preparing you for birth . Ask your partner if they would like to take part in the antenatal classes. Even if you've had children before, antenatal classes are still worth going to as you can meet other parents-to-be. The NCT offers online antenatal classes with small groups of people that live locally to you. Smoking, drinking and caffeine in pregnancy Do your best to stop smoking and give up alcohol , and go easy on the tea, coffee and anything else with caffeine. Ask your midwife or GP for support. Vitamins in pregnancy To keep bones and muscles healthy, we need vitamin D. From late March/early April to the end of September, most people make enough vitamin D from sunlight on their skin. However, between October and early March, you should consider taking a daily vitamin D supplement because we cannot make enough from sunlight. Some people should take a vitamin D supplement all year round, find out if this applies to you on the NHS website. You just need 10 micrograms daily (it's the same for grown-ups and kids). Check if you're entitled to free vitamins . Exercising in pregnancy It's recommended that you do 150 minutes of exercise a week while pregnant . You could start off with just 10 minutes of daily exercise – perhaps take a brisk walk outside. Listen to your body and do what feels right for you. Healthy eating There's no need to eat for 2. Now you're in the 3rd trimester, you may need an extra 200 calories a day, but that's not much. It's about the same as 2 slices of wholemeal toast with margarine. You just need to eat a healthy balanced diet, with a variety of different foods every day, including plenty of fruit and veg. Have a look at our guide to healthy eating in pregnancy . You may be able to get free milk, fruit and veg through the Healthy Start scheme . Emotional and mental wellbeing How are you today? If you're feeling anxious or low, talk to your doctor or midwife who can point you in the right direction to get all the support that you need. You could also discuss your worries with your partner, friends and family. You may be worried about your relationship, or money, or having somewhere permanent to live. Don't keep it to yourself – it's important that you ask for help if you need it. Contraception Getting pregnant again is probably the last thing on your mind right now. However, now is a good time to start planning what type of contraception you would like to use after your baby is born. Getting pregnant again could happen sooner than you realise, and too short a gap between babies is known to cause problems. Talk to your GP or midwife to help you decide. Talk to your midwife about newborn screening You will be offered newborn screening tests for your baby soon after they are born. These screening tests are recommended by the NHS because they can make sure your baby is given appropriate treatment if needed. Your decisions about whether or not you want these screening tests will be respected, and healthcare professionals will support you. Ask your midwife or doctor for more information about newborn screening . More in week-by-week Week 33 As the weeks go by, you're probably feeling really tired now, which is not surprising. Week 34 Week 31 More in week-by-week guide to pregnancy Sign up for emails Our emails include NHS trusted advice and support, tailored to your stage of pregnancy or baby's age. Sign up for emails Is this page useful? Yes No Thank you for your feedback!