SOURCE: NHS — Miscarriage
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/miscarriage/

﻿ Miscarriage - NHS Skip to main content Miscarriage A miscarriage is the loss of a pregnancy before 24 weeks. Get medical help if you think you're having a miscarriage. Symptoms of a miscarriage The main symptom of miscarriage is usually vaginal bleeding that happens before 24 weeks of pregnancy. Signs of bleeding in pregnancy may include: spots of pink, red or brown blood on your underwear or toilet paper (spotting) larger areas of pink, red or brown blood that may need a period pad (light bleeding) red blood that soaks through a pad (heavy bleeding) Other symptoms of a miscarriage can include: pain and cramping in your lower tummy pink, grey or white lumps coming out of your vagina, which may look or feel stringy fluid suddenly coming out of your vagina Sometimes you may have no symptoms and you'll only find out you've had a miscarriage at a pregnancy scan. This is called a missed miscarriage. Information: Vaginal bleeding and tummy pain in pregnancy can be caused by other things and are not always serious. But if you’re worried you can call your maternity unit (if you have one), or you can call NHS 111. Urgent advice: Get urgent medical help if: You’re pregnant and have either: light vaginal bleeding or spotting (but no, or only mild, tummy pain that does not stop you doing daily tasks) vaginal discharge that's unusual for you or fluid leaking from your vagina Call your maternity unit if you have the phone number. If you’re less than 20 weeks pregnant, an early pregnancy unit may be able to help. You can find how to contact one on your local NHS trust website or in your maternity notes. If you do not have a maternity unit yet or cannot contact an early pregnancy unit, call NHS 111. Immediate action required: Call 999 if: You're pregnant, have vaginal bleeding and: you have severe pain in your tummy (you cannot do daily tasks or focus on TV or reading a book because of the pain) you have pain in your shoulder you feel sick, faint, dizzy or lose consciousness the bleeding is heavy (soaking a period pad soon after putting it on) These can be signs you need immediate treatment. How miscarriage is diagnosed If doctors think you might be having a miscarriage, you'll be asked some questions about your pregnancy, any previous pregnancies, and your general health. You may be offered tests to check your pregnancy including: blood tests or pee (urine) tests an internal vaginal (trans-vaginal) ultrasound scan Treatments for miscarriage A miscarriage cannot be stopped once it has started. You'll usually be offered different options for managing a miscarriage, depending on your symptoms and how many weeks pregnant you are. Early miscarriage (before 14 weeks) If you have a miscarriage during the first 14 weeks of pregnancy, your options may include: having no treatment and waiting for your symptoms to pass – this usually takes about 2 weeks, but can take longer taking medicine to help you pass the pregnancy – you may be able to go home after taking the medicine or you may be monitored in hospital a procedure where a thin tube is inserted through your vagina into your womb to remove the pregnancy using gentle suction – this is done using a general anaesthetic or local anaesthetic and you may be able to go home the same day Late miscarriage (between 14 to 23 weeks) If you're having a miscarriage at 14 to 23 weeks, your care team will discuss your options with you. You may need to give birth. Sometimes labour will start by itself, but if this does not happen you may be given medicines to help start it. A care team will support you throughout your labour and birth. Information: Find out more Tommy's: second trimester loss (late miscarriage) What happens after a miscarriage Everyone experiences miscarriage differently. You may feel physically better after a few days or weeks, but it can take longer. After a miscarriage you may: have tummy pain, which may last for a few days have vaginal bleeding or spotting, which may last for up to 2 weeks feel lots of different emotions, including feeling anxious and upset Sometimes it takes longer to come to terms with what's happened emotionally. If you're worried about any of your symptoms, contact a GP, NHS 111, or your pregnancy unit, if you have one. Counselling after a miscarriage Having a miscarriage can be difficult and upsetting. Support is available. You may be offered counselling , or you can ask your GP or pregnancy unit. Recovery at home There are things you can do that may help your recovery after a miscarriage. Do rest if you need to take paracetamol to help with pain talk to your partner, family or friends about how you feel Don’t do not have sex until your miscarriage symptoms have gone because there's a risk you could get an infection Trying to get pregnant after a miscarriage You can try to get pregnant again when you feel ready, after your symptoms have gone. After a miscarriage it can take up to 8 weeks before you have a period again. It may take a few months for your periods to go back to what's usual for you. Most women who've had a miscarriage go on to have a successful pregnancy in the future. Talk to a GP if you've had 3 or more miscarriages (recurrent miscarriage). You'll usually be referred for tests to find out if there's a cause that can be treated, and you'll be offered support. Causes of miscarriage It's not always known what causes miscarriage, but it's often because there's a problem with the way the pregnancy develops. Some things that may increase your chances of having a miscarriage include: being aged 35 or over being from a Black African or Black Caribbean background the baby's father being aged 45 or over polycystic ovary syndrome , diabetes, a blood clotting condition, or a thyroid condition, such as underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) a problem with your womb low levels of a hormone called progesterone vitamin D deficiency smoking drinking a lot of caffeine drinking alcohol living with obesity or being underweight being exposed to harmful chemicals or high levels of air pollution Help and support after a miscarriage Having a miscarriage can be difficult both physically and emotionally. Your GP surgery or pregnancy unit can offer you information about counselling and other support services. Support is also available for partners. You may find it helpful to talk to other people who've experienced miscarriage at a local or online support group. There are also national charities that can offer information and support. Miscarriage Association The Miscarriage Association offers advice and support for anyone affected by the loss of a baby during pregnancy, including a helpline, live chat and support groups. Website: www.miscarriageassociation.org.uk Helpline: 0303 003 6464 Miscarriage Association: support services Tommy's Tommy's is a national pregnancy and baby charity and offers advice and support for anyone affected by baby loss. Website: www.tommys.org Helpline: 0800 0147 800 Tommy's: support after miscarriage Tommy's: stillbirth information and support Page last reviewed: 31 March 2026 Next review due: 31 March 2029