SOURCE: NHS — Vitamins Supplements
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/pregnancy/keeping-well/vitamins-supplements-and-nutrition/

﻿ Vitamins, minerals and supplements in pregnancy - NHS Skip to main content Vitamins, supplements and nutrition in pregnancy Eating a healthy, varied diet in pregnancy will help you get most of the vitamins and minerals you need. But when you're pregnant, or there's a chance you might get pregnant, it's important to also take a folic acid supplement. It's recommended that you take: 400 micrograms of folic acid every day – from before you're pregnant until you're 12 weeks pregnant This is to reduce the risk of problems in the baby's development in the early weeks of pregnancy. It is also recommended that you take a daily vitamin D supplement. Do not take cod liver oil or any supplements containing vitamin A (retinol) when you're pregnant. Too much vitamin A could harm your baby. Always check the label. You also need to know which foods to avoid in pregnancy Where to get pregnancy supplements You can get supplements from pharmacies and supermarkets, or a GP may be able to prescribe them for you. If you want to get your folic acid from a multivitamin tablet, make sure the tablet does not contain vitamin A (or retinol). You may be able to get free vitamins if you qualify for the Healthy Start scheme. Find out more about the Healthy Start scheme Folic acid before and during pregnancy It's important to take a 400 micrograms folic acid tablet every day before you're pregnant and until you're 12 weeks pregnant. Folic acid can help prevent birth defects known as neural tube defects, including spina bifida . If you did not take folic acid before you conceived, you should start as soon as you find out you're pregnant. Try to eat green leafy vegetables which contain folate (the natural form of folic acid) and breakfast cereals and fat spreads with folic acid added to them. It's difficult to get the amount of folate recommended for a healthy pregnancy from food alone, which is why it's important to take a folic acid supplement. Higher-dose folic acid If you have a higher chance of your pregnancy being affected by neural tube defects, you will be advised to take a higher dose of folic acid (5 milligrams). You will be advised to take this each day until you're 12 weeks pregnant. You may have a higher chance if: you or the baby's biological father have a neural tube defect you or the baby's biological father have a family history of neural tube defects you have had a previous pregnancy affected by a neural tube defect you have diabetes you take anti-epilepsy medicine you take anti-retroviral medicine for HIV If any of this applies to you, talk to a GP. They can prescribe a higher dose of folic acid. A GP or midwife may also recommend additional screening tests during your pregnancy. Find out about epilepsy and pregnancy Vitamin D in pregnancy You need 10 micrograms of vitamin D each day. It's recommended pregnant and breastfeeding women take a daily supplement containing this amount between September and March. Vitamin D regulates the amount of calcium and phosphate in the body, which are needed to keep bones, teeth and muscles healthy. Our bodies make vitamin D when our skin is exposed to summer sunlight (from late March/early April to the end of September) Between the months of September and March the body cannot make sufficient vitamin D from sunlight alone, which is why a supplement is recommended. Vitamin D is also in some foods, including: oily fish (such as salmon, mackerel, herring and sardines) – during pregnancy, you should eat no more than 2 portions of oily fish a week egg yolks red meat fortified foods – such as some fat spreads and breakfast cereals liver – but avoid eating liver during pregnancy Because vitamin D is only found in a small number of foods, whether naturally occurring or added, it is difficult to get enough from foods alone. Do not take more than 100 micrograms (4,000 IU) of vitamin D a day as it could be harmful. You can get vitamin supplements containing vitamin D free of charge if you're pregnant or breastfeeding and qualify for the Healthy Start scheme . Information: There have been some reports about vitamin D reducing the risk of coronavirus (COVID-19). But there is currently not enough evidence to support taking vitamin D solely to prevent or treat COVID-19. If you have dark skin or cover your skin a lot You may be at particular risk of not having enough vitamin D if: you have dark skin (for example, if you're of African, African Caribbean or south Asian origin) you cover your skin when outside or spend lots of time indoors You may need to consider taking a daily supplement of vitamin D all year. Talk to a midwife or doctor for advice. Iron in pregnancy If you do not have enough iron, you'll probably get very tired and may suffer from anaemia . Lean meat, green leafy vegetables, dried fruit and nuts contain iron. If you'd like to eat peanuts or foods that contain peanuts (such as peanut butter) during pregnancy, you can do so as part of a healthy, balanced diet unless you're allergic to them or your health professional advises you not to. Many breakfast cereals have iron added to them. If the iron level in your blood becomes low, a GP or midwife will advise you to take iron supplements. Vitamin C in pregnancy Vitamin C protects cells and helps keep them healthy. It's found in a wide variety of fruit and vegetables, and a balanced diet can provide all the vitamin C you need. Good sources include: oranges and orange juice red and green peppers strawberries blackcurrants broccoli brussels sprouts potatoes Calcium in pregnancy Calcium is vital for making your baby's bones and teeth. Sources of calcium include: milk, cheese and yoghurt green leafy vegetables, such as rocket, watercress or curly kale tofu soya drinks with added calcium bread and any foods made with fortified flour fish where you eat the bones, such as sardines and pilchards Vegetarian, vegan and special diets in pregnancy A varied and balanced vegetarian diet should provide enough nutrients for you and your baby during pregnancy. But you might find it more difficult to get enough iron and vitamin B12. Talk to a midwife or doctor about how to make sure you're getting enough of these important nutrients. If you're vegan or you follow a restricted diet because of a food intolerance (for example, a gluten-free diet for coeliac disease) or for religious reasons, talk to a midwife or GP. Ask to be referred to a dietitian for advice on how to make sure you're getting all the nutrients you need for you and your baby. Find out more about healthy eating if you're pregnant and vegetarian or vegan Healthy Start vitamins The Healthy Start scheme may be able to help you buy food and milk if you're pregnant or have a child under 4 years old and receive certain benefits, or you’re pregnant and under 18. If you're eligible, you'll be sent a Healthy Start card which you can use to buy certain types of milk, infant formula, fruit and vegetables. You can also use your card to get free vitamins. If you're not eligible for the Healthy Start scheme, some NHS organisations still offer the vitamins for free, or sell them. Ask a midwife about what's available in your area. More information: Read more information about Healthy Start, or apply for a Healthy Start card, on the Healthy Start scheme website Read more about getting vitamins on the Healthy Start scheme website Video: Should I take supplements during my pregnancy? In this video, a midwife explains which supplements you can take during pregnancy. Media last reviewed: 2 February 2026 Media review due: 2 February 2029 Get Start for Life pregnancy and baby emails Sign up for Start for Life's weekly emails for expert advice, videos and tips on pregnancy, birth and beyond. More in Keeping well in pregnancy Page last reviewed: 1 September 2023 Next review due: 1 September 2026