SOURCE: NHS Pregnancy Week 16
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/best-start-in-life/pregnancy/week-by-week-guide-to-pregnancy/2nd-trimester/week-16/

16 weeks pregnant guide - Best Start in Life - NHS Skip to main content Week 13 Week 14 Week 15 Week 16 Week 17 Week 18 Week 19 Week 20 Week 21 Week 22 Week 23 Week 24 Week 25 Week 26 Week 27 Week 16 Your baby is growing quickly and about to have another growth spurt. You will probably have put on some weight over the past few weeks too. What's happening in my body? You may see a midwife around now, who will weigh you and discuss how you're getting on, and you might get to hear your baby's heartbeat for the first time. You will also get the results of any blood tests that you had during your booking appointment . You will probably have been offered a test for 3 infectious diseases: HIV, hepatitis B and syphilis. If an infection has been picked up, then your midwife or doctor will talk to you about the best ways to protect your health and reduce the risk of passing on the infection to your baby. Your blood pressure will be checked and you will need to provide a urine sample. This will be checked for signs of protein that could show if you're at risk of developing a dangerous condition called pre-eclampsia . Constipation Constipation is common in early pregnancy – it's when you find it really hard to poo. It can make you feel bloated, sick and give you tummy ache. Try to: eat foods that are high in fibre, like wholemeal bread, fruit and veg, beans and lentils exercise regularly drink lots of water avoid iron supplements (but talk to your doctor or midwife before ditching any medication) Read more about easing constipation in pregnancy on the NHS website . Carbon monoxide alert You cannot see, smell or taste it – but carbon monoxide gas is a killer. You can be exposed to this harmful gas through breathing in cigarette smoke , and can also come into contact with it through faulty or poorly ventilated cooking or heating appliances. Routine carbon monoxide tests are now done during midwife appoints . If you've already got a carbon monoxide detector at home, check it's working. There's usually a test button – if it does not beep, the battery may need replacing or you need a new detector. You can pick one up at most supermarkets. 2nd trimester pregnancy symptoms (at 16 weeks) Everyone's pregnancy is different but if you feel unwell and it's getting you down, speak to your doctor or midwife. Your pregnancy symptoms may include: swollen and bleeding gums ( week 13's page has information about gum health ) pains on the side of your belly, caused by your expanding womb (known as 'round ligament pains') headaches (read about headaches in pregnancy on NHS.uk ) nosebleeds feeling bloated (read how to cope with bloating on week 10's page and constipation) indigestion and heartburn (read about dealing with indigestion and heartburn on week 25's page ) sore breasts leg cramps feeling hot dizziness swollen hands and feet urine infections vaginal infections ( week 15's page explains about how to treat vaginal infections ) darkened skin on your face or brown patches – this is known as chloasma or the "mask of pregnancy" greasier, spotty skin thicker and shinier hair You may also experience symptoms from earlier weeks, such as: morning sickness (read about dealing with morning sickness on week 6's page ) weird pregnancy cravings (read about pregnancy cravings on week 5's page ) a heightened sense of smell mood swings ( week 8's page has information on mood swings ) a white milky pregnancy discharge from your vagina and light spotting (seek medical advice for any bleeding) Read Tommy's guide to common pregnancy symptoms . What does my baby look like? Your baby, or foetus, is around 11.6cm long from head to bottom, which is the size of an avocado. Your baby is starting to pull faces now, but any smiling or frowning will be completely random, as there's no muscle control yet. The nervous system continues to develop, and this enables your baby to start moving their arms and legs. Your baby's hands can form fists and they may start punching around inside you too. You might be able to feel your baby kicking from week 17 onwards . Your baby is about the size of an avocado Action stations Think about telling your work Many women will tell their employer after they've had their first pregnancy scan at around 12 weeks. Once you tell your employer, you have maternity rights and can attend antenatal appointments during paid work time. You can also ask for a risk assessment of your workplace to ensure that you're working in a safe environment. Start doing pelvic floor exercises It's a good time to tone up your pelvic floor muscles. Gentle exercises can help to prevent leakage when you laugh, sneeze or cough. Get the muscles going by pretending that you're having a pee and then stopping midflow. Visit Tommy's for more information on pelvic floor exercises. Antenatal classes Ask your midwife or doctor about online antenatal classes – they may be able to recommend one. The charity Tommy's has lots of useful information on antenatal classes and preparing you for birth . Even if you've had children before, antenatal classes are still worth going to as you can meet other parents-to-be. The NCT offers online antenatal classes with small groups of people that live locally to you. Smoking, drinking and caffeine in pregnancy Do your best to stop smoking and give up alcohol , and go easy on the tea, coffee and anything else with caffeine. Ask your midwife or GP for support. Vitamins in pregnancy To keep bones and muscles healthy, we need vitamin D. From late March/early April to the end of September, most people make enough vitamin D from sunlight on their skin. However, between October and early March, you should consider taking a daily vitamin D supplement because we cannot make enough from sunlight. Some people should take a vitamin D supplement all year round, find out if this applies to you on the NHS website. You just need 10 micrograms (it's the same for grown-ups and kids). Check if you're entitled to free vitamins . Exercising in pregnancy It's recommended that you do 150 minutes of exercise a week while pregnant . You could start off with just 10 minutes of daily exercise – perhaps take a brisk walk outside. Listen to your body and do what feels right for you. Healthy eating There's no need to eat for 2. You just need to eat a healthy balanced diet, with a variety of different foods every day, including plenty of fruit and veg. Have a look at our guide to healthy eating in pregnancy . You may be able to get free milk, fruit and veg through the Healthy Start scheme . More in week-by-week Week 17 You might start to feel your baby move now. You will not be able to tell exactly what your baby's up to, but soon you could be feeling every kick, punch, hiccup and somersault. Week 18 Week 15 More in week-by-week guide to pregnancy Sign up for emails Our emails include NHS trusted advice and support, tailored to your stage of pregnancy or baby's age. Sign up for emails Is this page useful? Yes No Thank you for your feedback!