SOURCE: NHS — Preeclampsia
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/pre-eclampsia/

﻿ Pre-eclampsia - NHS Skip to main content Pre-eclampsia Pre-eclampsia is a pregnancy-related condition that causes high blood pressure. It can have serious complications but there are treatments that can help. Symptoms of pre-eclampsia Early signs of pre-eclampsia include high blood pressure (hypertension) and having protein in your pee. It's unlikely that you'll notice these signs, so you'll be offered regular blood pressure and pee checks at your routine antenatal (pregnancy) appointments . Other symptoms include: a severe headache that does not go away with simple painkillers vision problems, such as blurred vision or seeing flashing lights pain below the ribs sudden swelling of the face, hands or feet feeling very unwell heartburn that does not go away with heartburn medicines being sick (vomiting) Any of these symptoms can be serious and need to be checked immediately. Pre-eclampsia is most likely from 20 weeks of pregnancy onwards, but it can happen at any point in pregnancy. Information: Sometimes pre-eclampsia develops in the days or weeks after your baby is born. Urgent advice: Get urgent medical help if: You're pregnant or have given birth in the last few weeks and: you have symptoms of pre-eclampsia If you're pregnant, call your maternity unit if you have the number. If you've recently given birth or cannot call your maternity until, call 111. Video: what is pre-eclampsia and what are the warning signs? In this video, a midwife explains the warning signs of pre-eclampsia. Media last reviewed: 1 September 2023 Media review due: 1 September 2026 Tests for pre-eclampsia Tests for pre-eclampsia include: blood pressure checks pee tests If a midwife or doctor thinks you may have pre-eclampsia, they'll usually refer you to hospital for further tests. These can include a blood test and ultrasound scans to check your baby's growth. Complications of pre-eclampsia In most cases pre-eclampsia is not severe. Sometimes it can cause complications for your baby, including slower growth during pregnancy and premature birth (being born too early). Sometimes pre-eclampsia can lead to serious, possibly life-threatening complications. These include: seizures (eclampsia) HELLP syndrome (a rare liver and blood disorder) stroke stillbirth Treating pre-eclampsia Currently there is no cure for pre-eclampsia, but there are treatments that can help manage your symptoms. The symptoms usually improve once your baby is born. You'll be seen by a specialist, usually in hospital, to check how severe the condition is. A care plan will be agreed with you to keep you and your baby as healthy as possible. This usually includes more regular appointments in pregnancy to monitor the pre-eclampsia, and extra scans to check how well your baby is growing. You'll usually be given a medicine to lower your blood pressure, and reduce your risk of a stroke. If your pre-eclampsia symptoms are not severe you may be able to go home. If you have severe pre-eclampsia, you may need to stay in hospital for monitoring and treatment until it's safe for your baby to be born. You might be given medicine to prevent seizures as an injection or drip. Pre-eclampsia and giving birth If you have pre-eclampsia, it's often safer for your baby to be born early, in some cases before 37 weeks. Labour may be started by a healthcare professional ( inducing labour ) or you may be offered a caesarean section . You'll be monitored in hospital after the birth and your baby may also need to be monitored. Pre-eclampsia symptoms usually go away after your baby is born, but sometimes they can continue after birth. After you leave hospital you may need to: take medicine for a few weeks to lower your blood pressure have regular blood pressure checks Find out more about premature labour and birth Causes of pre-eclampsia It's not known what causes pre-eclampsia. You may be at higher risk of pre-eclampsia if: you have diabetes , high blood pressure or kidney disease you have an autoimmune condition, such as lupus or antiphospholipid syndrome you've had pre-eclampsia in a previous pregnancy You may also have a higher risk of pre-eclampsia if: it's your first pregnancy you're aged 40 or over you're from a Black or South Asian ethnic background you're pregnant with multiple babies (twins or triplets) your mother, sister or another relative has had pre-eclampsia it's been 10 years or more since your last pregnancy you have a body mass index (BMI) of 35 or more before pregnancy How to reduce your risk of pre-eclampsia It's important to attend your pregnancy (antenatal) appointments. This is where your midwife can work out whether you are at risk of developing pre-eclampsia. If a midwife or doctor thinks you're at a higher risk of pre-eclampsia they may prescribe: aspirin – every day from week 12 of pregnancy until your baby is born calcium supplements – if you do not not get enough calcium from the foods you eat Do not start taking aspirin or calcium supplements unless you have been advised to by a midwife or GP. Maintaining a healthy weight by eating a healthy, balanced diet and exercising can also help lower your risk of pre-eclampsia. Help and support for pre-eclampsia If you have pre-eclampsia it can be worrying. Your midwife and doctor will offer you support. The charity Action on Pre-eclampsia offers support and information. Action on Pre-eclampsia Website: action-on-pre-eclampsia.org.uk Action on Pre-eclampsia: pre-eclampsia support and information Page last reviewed: 23 March 2026 Next review due: 23 March 2029