SOURCE: WHO — who_maternal_health
URL: https://www.who.int/health-topics/maternal-health

Maternal health Skip to main content Overview Maternal health refers to the health of women during pregnancy, childbirth and the postnatal period. Each stage should be a positive experience, ensuring women and their babies reach their full potential for health and well-being. Although important progress has been made in the last two decades, about 287 000 women died during and following pregnancy and childbirth in 2020. This number is unacceptably high. The most common direct causes of maternal injury and death are excessive blood loss, infection, high blood pressure, unsafe abortion, and obstructed labour, as well as indirect causes such as anemia, malaria, and heart disease. Most maternal deaths are preventable with timely management by a skilled health professional working in a supportive environment. Ending preventable maternal death must remain at the top of the global agenda. At the same time, simply surviving pregnancy and childbirth can never be the marker of successful maternal health care. It is critical to expand efforts reducing maternal injury and disability to promote health and well-being. Every pregnancy and birth is unique. Addressing inequalities that affect health outcomes, especially sexual and reproductive health and rights and gender, is fundamental to ensuring all women have access to respectful and high-quality maternity care. Impact About 140 million births take place every year and the proportion attended by skilled health personnel has increased: from 58% in 1990 to 81% in 2019. This is mostly due to larger numbers of births taking place at a health facility. Deaths from complications during pregnancy, childbirth, and the postnatal period have declined by 38% in the last two decades, but at an average reduction of just under 3% per year, this pace of progress is far too slow. It also hides vast inequalities within and across countries. More than half of maternal deaths occur in fragile and humanitarian settings. Sub-Saharan Africa and Southern Asia share the greatest burden of maternal deaths, 86% of the global total in 2017. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) offers an opportunity for the international community to work together and accelerate progress to improve maternal health for all women, in all countries, under all circumstances. SDG targets for maternal health include 3.1, aiming for an average global ratio of less than 70 deaths per 100 000 births by 2030, and 3.8, calling for the achievement of universal health coverage. These cannot be achieved without reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health coverage for all. WHO Response Improving maternal health is one of WHO’s key priorities, grounded in a human rights approach and linked to efforts on universal health coverage. WHO advocates for health planning where women’s values and preferences are at the centre of their own care. Meaningful engagement and empowerment of women, families, communities, and providers is essential for quality improvement initiatives. Promoting health along the whole continuum of pregnancy, childbirth and postnatal care is also crucial. This includes good nutrition, detecting and preventing diseases, ensuring access to sexual and reproductive health and supporting women who may be experiencing intimate partner violence. It is WHO’s responsibility to monitor progress towards the global goal for reducing maternal death (SDG target 3.1). WHO generates data, research, clinical guidelines and programmatic tools to support achievement of global targets and evidence-based strategies for ending preventable maternal mortality (EPMM) and improving maternal health and well-being. WHO supports Member States as they implement plans to promote access to quality health services for all. Strong partnerships are crucial, such as The Network for Improving Quality of Care for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health, launched by WHO and UNICEF. Fact sheets Adolescent pregnancy Maternal mortality Pre-eclampsia Zika virus Questions and answers WHO Statement on Caesarean Section Rates Databases and tools Maternal mortality data Maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health data portal Resolutions and decisions WHA72.2 Primary health care WHA72.3 Community health workers delivering primary health care: opportunities and challenges Technical work Maternal Health Unit Maternal, Newborn, Child, Adolescent health and Ageing department Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP) Maternal and perinatal health (SRH) News All → 20 November 2025 Departmental update Stronger infection prevention and management, better maternal outcomes 5 October 2025 Joint News Release Global health agencies issue new recommendations to help end deaths from postpartum haemorrhage 3 September 2025 Departmental update Bridging global guidance and local action for maternal and newborn health 14 August 2025 Departmental update World Patient Safety Day 2025: explore free courses to enhance newborn and child health Latest publications All → 28 April 2026 Tracking progress in reducing maternal mortality towards 2030: brief Reducing maternal mortality remains a central global health priority within the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which call for substantial... Download Read More 22 February 2026 Consolidated guidelines for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage: implementation... The Consolidated guidelines for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage: implementation guide aims to support the implementation... Download Read More 31 December 2025 Conducting qualitative research on maternal morbidities: a manual Pregnancy and childbirth are reproductive health events for which there are strong cultural norms and behavioural expectations, which vary between settings... Download Read More 14 November 2025 WHO recommendations on care for women with diabetes during pregnancy WHO maternal and perinatal health guidelines are relevant to those providing care and support during pregnancy, labour, childbirth and postnatal periods,... Download Read More Our work All → Prioritizing quality of care in maternal health Strengthening health systems and communities Raising the importance of postnatal care Making childbirth a positive experience Promoting healthy pregnancy Strengthening home-based records implementation Robust monitoring of maternal health data Strengthening quality midwifery for all mothers and newborns Events All → WHO webinar for the International Day of the Midwife 2026 5 May 2026 10:00 – 11:30 CET Global pre-eclampsia summit 5 – 8 May 2026 Webinar: Maternal mortality and the impact of health system-stability 18 February 2026 14:00 – 15:00 CET Spotlights 6 Priorities for women and health Concrete action is needed to ensure women and girls in all their diversity can enjoy the right to health – during, and beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. Why we need to talk about losing a baby Losing a baby in pregnancy through miscarriage or stillbirth is still a taboo subject worldwide, linked to stigma and shame. Many women still do not receive appropriate and respectful care when their baby dies during pregnancy or childbirth. Infographics All → Infographic Diabetes in pregnancy can pose health risks for both the mother and baby Infographic Diabetes affects about 1 in 6 pregnancies Infographic Diabetes management should be integrated into routine antenatal care Infographic Postpartum haemorrhage can happen after any birth Videos All → 24 March 2026 A focus on: expanding access to medication for postpartum haemorrhage 14 November 2025 PPH bundle: first response treatment for postpartum haemorrhage 5 June 2025 Improving quality of care to save lives in Sierra Leone 7 April 2025 Healthy beginnings, hopeful futures Related health topics Health interventions Abortion Health interventions Breastfeeding Populations and demographics Newborn health Health systems Nursing and midwifery Health and wellbeing Sexual health Conditions Stillbirth